Course 3, Module 2.
In this module,
we're going to talk
about sectors and clusters.
Sectors, like we talked
about in our last section,
are formatted during
low-level formatting.
They are written
to the disk during
low-level formatting which is
performed by the manufacturer.
In order for our
operating system to be
able to read from these sectors,
they must have an address for
the operating system
to locate and read
and write data to and
from the sectors.
Sectors are also relative
to the physical disk,
which means they can be
relative to the physical disk,
meaning that the disk
itself from the
absolute sector zero,
absolute meeting prior
to the operating system,
sectors will have addresses that
is relative to the
physical disk itself
and not the volume
within the drive itself,
that physical drive.
But we'll talk more about
that as we go along.
Again, this is performed
by the manufacturer.
They are usually
512 bytes in size.
That can vary with
advanced format disks
where then they'll be
4,096 bytes in size.
But those disks are marked
AAF and you will be
able to recognize them.
Sectors are the
smallest readable unit
on a disk and the smallest
writeable unit on a disk,
and that's going to become
important as we move along.
Sector numbering starts at zero,
and that's very important to
remember because when we're
locating items on our disk
like our partitions
or a specific file,
and we have to calculate
that numbering,
we have to remember
that it starts at zero,
so we must always
account from zero.
Sector numbering can be
physical or logical.
If it's physical, it's usually
relating prior to the
operating system,
but it can also be addressed in
a physical address or
a logical address.
The physical address
would be from
the start of the disk and
the logical address would be from
the start of the volume
or the partition.
How are these sectors addressed?
Well, we use something called
logical block address or an LBA,
is what is used on all
modern hard drives today.
When you look at your
label on your hard drive,
as you can see in the diagram on
the slide, you can see our disk,
we have an LBA, we
look to the right,
highlighted in pink there.
We have a number.
Now that is the
logical block address,
with status keeping us
the total number of
sectors on the disk.
That is the total
number of sectors.
If we wanted to find the
total number of bytes,
we would multiply the LBA
times our sector size,
which is usually going to be 512,
and that would give
us our total number
of bytes on the disk.
Also on this disk label,
we can see a capacity of
one terabyte,
highlighted in blue,
we have the serial number
down here in green,
and a model number down
here highlighted in yellow.
These is all important
information you want to
note on your hard drives
because this serial number
is going to be different
than the serial number
on the outside of
the computer case
and you always want
to make note of that.
Like I said, sectors are
numbered sequentially,
so we'll have sector 0,
then sector 1, 2, 3, 4,
all the way continuing
to the end of the drive.
Legacy addressing
or cylinder, head,
sector, CHS addressing
is no longer used.
This was relative to
the structure of the
physical drive itself.
It took into account
the number of
cylinders, heads, and sectors.
We looked at cylinders
and heads when we looked
at the physical structure,
that is layout, in
our previous module.
This was relative to the
physical structure of the drive,
but it was limited
to 8.2 gigabytes,
and most modern drives
are going to be much
larger than 8.2 gigabytes.
This also has to do with
the number of bytes
available to address the sectors,
only allowed us to address
up to 8.2 gigabytes.
We're going to talk
more about sector
addressing as we go
through this course.
Clusters. Clusters,
like we learned,
were a group of sectors,
and these are written during
high-level of formatting.
When we format a drive,
we have the option to
set the cluster size
or it can be set automatically
by the operating system.
Cluster size will vary
with the size of the disk.
The larger the disk, usually
the larger the cluster size.
The most common cluster size
you're going to see
is eight sectors,
but it does vary with
the size of the disk.
Cluster numbering starts at one,
not zero, like sectors.
Cluster numerating starts at one.
Clusters are going to be
relative to the
partition of the volume,
to that drive letter.
Cluster of one would
start at the beginning,
say of our C drive,
for example, not at
the beginning of the
physical disk itself.
They are relative to the volume.
Clusters are the
smallest allocable unit.
What that means is when
you write a file to disk,
the operating system saves a
certain amount of space for
that file and it's going
to save it in clusters.
It's going to save, say,
two clusters for that file.
It can't save 1.5 or
one and a quarter,
it has to save by full clusters.
So there will be
leftover space usually
because most files
aren't going to be
exactly the same size
as the clusters.
They won't usually end
on a cluster boundary.
We'll talk more about
that space that's
left over as we go
through this path.
Unpartitioned space.
This is space that is going to
be prior to the start
of the logical volume.
Before my C drive
actually starts,
there is space on
my physical disk prior
to that logical volume,
then that is considered
unpartitioned space.
That's going to be addressed
in sectors and it's
going to be relative to
the physical disk itself.
What we're going to find
here is usually like
our master boot
record, our boot code,
our partition tables and
we're not going to have
cluster addressing in this area.
In our next module,
we are going to go ahead
and learn how to use
active disk editor so we can take
a look at these data
structures on disk
and get a better look into
what we're talking about.